this video was produced for
www.school.com keto for
cancer clinical research framework
proposal for ketogenic metabolic therapy
in gleo
blastoma part one abstract overview of
the current standard of care
introduction of General press pulse
Concepts including the glucose Ketone
index
gki ketogenic metabolic therapy for
lowering blood glut
glucose abstract gleo blastoma GBM is
the most aggressive primary brain tumor
in adults with a universally lethal
prognosis despite maximal standard
therapies here we present a consensus
treatment protocol based on the
metabolic requirements of glioblastoma
cells for the two major fermentable
fuels glucose and glutamine glucose is a
source of carbon and ATP synthesis for
tumor growth through glycolysis while
glutamine provides nitrogen carbon and
ATP synthesis through glutaminolysis as
no tumor can grow without anabolic
substrates or energy the simultaneous
targeting of glycolysis and
glutaminolysis is expected to reduce the
proliferation of most if not all GBM
cells ketogenic metabolic therapy kmt
leverages diet drug combinations that
inhibit glycolysis glutaminolysis and
growth signaling while shifting energy
metabolism to to therapeutic ketosis the
glucose Ketone index gki is a
standardized biomarker for assessing
biological compliance ideally via
real-time monitoring ketogenic metabolic
therapy aims to increase substrate
competition and normalize the tumor
micro environment through gki adjusted
ketogenic diets calorie restriction and
fasting while also targeting glycolytic
and glutaminolytic flux using specific
metabolic
Inhibitors the proposed strategy may be
implemented as a synergistic metabolic
priming Baseline in gly blastoma as well
as other
tumors background standard of care for
brain cancer management Cleo blastoma
GBM the most common and aggressive
primary brain tumor in adults has one of
the highest mortality rates of all
cancers despite the Advent of
multimodality in neurooncology and
emergence of Novel therapies long-term
survival remains poor for most
high-grade brain
tumors in fact median overall survival
MOS for gleo blastoma is only marginally
better today than it was in
1926 14 to 21 months versus 8 to 14
months respectively more importantly
incremental improvements in median
overall survival or progression free
survival PFS should not be confused with
long-term survival which remains less
than 0.8% at 10 years years from
diagnosis none of the current cytotoxic
molecularly targeted or immune-based
therapies have translated into robust
improvements in long-term survival at
the population level when deciding on
pallative care oncologists and patients
may have a different understanding of
therapeutic goals and patients may not
understand that the proposed treatments
are unlikely to be Curative leading to
inaccurate
expectations if therapeutic success is
defined as long-term survival it becomes
clear that no major advancements have
been made in gly blastoma therapy
despite A Century of cancer research the
current standard of care s so involves
maximal safe surgical resection
radiotherapy and ulite chemotherapy with
an average median overall survival
across clinical trials of 15.6 months
reaching a 5-year relative survival rate
of less than
10% unfortunately clinical trials with
various Therapies alone or in
combination have not yet achieved a
significant extension of survival
therefore patients should be informed of
the expected benefits and adverse
effects of existing therapeutic
approaches to assist with informed
consent and shared
decision-making considering the Dismal
prognosis despite maximal standard of
care novel clinical research Frameworks
are urgently needed to drive
improvements in quality of life and
long-term
survival cancer is a mitochondrial
metabolic Disease an emerging
therapeutic Paradigm to address these
challenges we propose research
guidelines for the management of gly
blastoma based on the understanding of
cancer as a mitochondrial metabolic
disease two major biochemical processes
exist to generate energy in eukaryotic
animal cells substrate level
phosphorilation SLP also known as
fermentation and mitochondrial oxidative
phosphorilation oxphos via electron
transport chain induced
chemiosmosis non-tumoral cells are
metabolically flexible in the presence
of oxygen oxphos is sufficient to supply
most of the energy requirements in a
highly efficient and regulated system
relying on fermentation only under
certain physiological conditions
conversely SLP fermentation can produce
energy in the cytool and in the
mitochondria independent of
oxos cancer cells including gleo
blastoma are largely dependent on
increased fermentation of glucose and
glutamine through the glycolysis and
glutaminolysis Pathways regardless of
the presence of oxygen in this protocol
we favor a functional definition of SLP
fermentation dependency as the
comparatively limited capacity of
malignant cells to sustain long-term
proliferation when forced to use oxphos
exclusive metabolism EG deprivation of
glucose and glutamine the two primary AR
fermentation fuels at the substrate
transport or utilization level
insufficient or dysfunctional Ox fos and
cancer cells as compared to normal cells
is hypothesized to arise from the well
documented and Universal abnormalities
in the number structure Dynamics and
Collective functional efficiency of the
mitochondrial
population to our knowledge there are no
models of cancer that retain aggressive
and Limitless replic ative capacity in
the simultaneous absence of glycolysis
and glutaminolysis despite substitution
with non-fermentable oxos fuels EG
Ketone bodies fatty acids pyruvate
lactate as recapitulated by essential
nutrient constraints in cell culture
similarly neither basic nor clinical
research to date supports the notion
that tumors with certain mutations EG
Brath v600e
can effectively metabolize fatty acids
or Ketone bodies to maintain constant
growth after effective dual targeting of
glucose and glutamine even if they may
do so over short experimental end points
as long as SLP fermentation flux is
maintained the proposed metabolic
dependencies are summarized in figure
one from a translational perspective
attaining a sufficient level of nutrient
stress in Vivo will likely require whole
body physiological adaptations recap
capitulating fasting metabolism as well
as pharmacological interventions
metabolic Inhibitors reducing the
effective ATP biosynthetic output of the
glycolytic and glutaminolytic
Pathways regrettably standard gleo
blastoma Therapeutics are not designed
to take advantage of the metabolic
vulnerabilities of cancer cells instead
they focus on DNA repair
mechanisms in fact as an unintended
consequence of non-specific cell damage
radiotherapy has been shown to induce
detrimental metabolic changes and
inflammation in the tumor micro
environment impacting the phenotype of
recurrence which should be weighed
against the desirable short-term
cytotoxic or immune potentiation effects
in a similar fashion Taz olamide may
increase systemic inflammation and tumor
driver
mutations both brain directed
radiotherapy and systemic
anti-neoplastic therapy can result in
neurological complications s including
brain tissue necrosis brain atrophy and
neurocognitive impairment which should
be prevented if long-term survival is
expected furthermore as part of
supportive therapy patients with brain
cancer often receive corticosteroids EG
dexamethasone to reduce vasogenic edema
the injudicious use of corticosteroids
has been questioned due to correlations
with reduced survival via disregulated
glucose metabolism increased insulin
signaling and immune
suppression while conventional chemor
radiotherapies in gleo blastoma are
well-intentioned not addressing the
unique characteristics of cancer
metabolism May hinder their long-term
Effectiveness given the emphasis on
patient autonomy in contemporary medical
ethics we advocate for well-informed
patients to actively participate in
their disease management fostering
supportive follow-up care to explore
suitable clinical trials and compliment
therapies therefore to reach a broader
patient population novel evidence-based
treatments must be developed tested and
accepted into standard clinical
guidelines in pursuit of this goal
accumulating evidence suggests that
targeting glycolysis and glutaminolysis
while transitioning the patient's whole
body physiology into therapeutic ketosis
Could Be an Effective and
translationally viable anti-neoplastic
strategy winter and colleagues coined
the term ketogenic metabolic therapy kmt
to describe the systemic metabolic
changes induced by very low carbohydrate
ketogenic diets calorie restriction and
or
fasting in the current framework
ketogenic metabolic therapy is redefined
and expanded as an umbrella term that
includes long-term dietary physical
activity and lifestyle modifications
requiring objective measurable
biological outcome comes combined with
pharmacological targeting of glycolysis
glutaminolysis and the tumor micro
environment ketogenic metabolic therapy
is increasingly recognized as an
emerging therapeutic approach for a
broad range of cancers while also
improving quality of life very low
carbohydrate moderate protein high fat
ketogenic diets KDs induce a metabolic
state of increased glycolytic substrate
competition for cancer cells cells while
also elevating non-fermentable Ketone
bodies to serve as an alternative energy
source in normal cells in this context
ketogenic diets calorie restriction and
fasting are
anti-angiogenic anti-inflammatory and
anti-invasive and can facilitate cancer
cell death through multiple
mechanisms additionally Ketone body
metabolism will enhance the Delta ATP
hydrolysis in normal cells thus awarding
normal cells a biow energetic advantage
over tumor cells a reduction in the rate
of fermentation will also lower the
acidity in the tumor
microenvironment subsequently reducing
inflammation and potentially limiting
distant
metastasis activities associated with
cancer cell proliferation such as
biomass synthesis are also inhibited by
restricting the rate of glucose and
glutamine
fermentation it is important to mention
however that dietary changes alone are
un likely to control tumor progression
in most patients while rigorous
calorically restricted ketogenic diets
and fasting may be effective in
targeting glycolysis insulin and growth
signaling they do not adequately inhibit
glutaminolysis
consequently it will be essential to
design and test ketogenic metabolic
therapy protocols with drugs that also
inhibit glutaminolysis at the substrate
enzyme and or transport level current
perspectives on leveraging cancer
metabolism are mixed and often
contradictory although most agree on the
need for combinatorial approaches we
propose that the best possibility of
effective metabolic therapies will
involve the simultaneous targeting of
glucose and glutamine specifically SLP
flux after whole body adaptation to
therapeutic ketosis leading to a
normalization of the tumor micro
environment and enhancement of ox FAS
function and adaptive capacity in normal
cells it should be noted that most early
clinical trials explored additivity with
standard of care of either dietary
modification alone EG ketogenic diets
caloric restriction amino acid depletion
fasting mimicking protocols or single
pathway metabolic inhibition EG systemic
glucose or insulin regulation via
metformin or sglt2 Inhibitors glycolysis
Inhibitors such as 2 deoxy de glucose
glutamin is Inhibitors such as CB
839 or Don prod drugs in preclinical
models ketogenic diets in monotherapy
induce predominantly favorable survival
prolonging
effects experimental factors such as
failure to consistently reduce glycemia
or insulin despite increases in
ketonemia diet initiation before or
after tumor implantation composition
ketogenic ratio and palad ability as
well as ad libitum or restricted feeding
could account for diverging results even
when using identical tumor models for
high-grade Goma therapy a cumulative
total of 187 patients have been treated
in more than 13 clinical studies thus
far demonstrating feasibility safety and
tolerability as well as improvements in
quality of life and
self-management additionally more than
60 ongoing clinical trials are testing
key enic diets in combination with
standard immune-based and other targeted
approaches such as pi3k Inhibitors engo
blastoma and other solid
malignancies unfortunately there are no
established therapeutic targets for
clinical implementation Beyond achieving
a minimal state of ketosis usually at a
very modest level meaning more than
0.3m capillary beta hydroxy butyrate and
if possible sporadic but not sustained
improvements in glycemia or insulin
signaling these have not been considered
primary end points in any published
study so far we have limited our
proposal to mechanisms related to ATP
synthesis with the intention of
establishing a clear therapeutic
prioritization SLP fermentation greater
than
oxos the goal of this framework is to
formalize and build upon previous
Studies by constructing rational
combinatory diet drug approaches we aim
to minimize off Target Effects by
following the Press pulse therapeutic
principle where drugs with a narrow
therapeutic index such as cytotoxic
agents or metabolic Inhibitors are
carefully dose escalated and applied
intermittently on a metabolic priming
dietary ketogenic metabolic therapy
Baseline purpose and rationale building
upon this knowledge we offer a framework
for future research on ketogenic
metabolic therapy with additional
pharmacologic iCal targeting of
glycolysis and glutaminolysis as a
minimally toxic therapeutic strategy for
gly blastoma management the resulting
shift to a fat derived Ketone body
metabolism allows for the relative
reduction of glucose and glutamine
driven fermentation while maintaining
normal cell function by upregulating
oxidative metabolism and increasing
competitive evolutionary pressure the
proposed drugs and strategies are
intended to further restrict
biosynthetic and bioener itic Pathways
and tumor tissues we have constructed
this proposal by synthesizing the expert
opinion of researchers and clinicians
involved in previous preclinical and
translational ketogenic metabolic
therapy research importantly while this
approach was developed primarily for gly
blastoma the mechanistic basis should be
applicable to all malignant cancers
exhibiting SLP fermentation dependency
on glucose and glutamine as defined
above in this case gleo asoa was
selected due to poor standard of care
outcomes and ethical considerations as
well as the potential benefit of
therapeutic ketosis to seizure
management and intracranial edema rather
than intrinsic bioenergetic
characteristics in the proposed
framework ketogenic metabolic therapy is
positioned as an evolutionarily
advantageous prerequisite metabolic
priming Baseline upon which other
cytotoxic therapies are introduced to
assess potential Synergy additivity or
antagonism rationalizing research
priorities a growing body of evidence
suggests that well-formulated ketogenic
diets can slow tumor progression but
most published reports to date have
lacked a robust modifiable protocol for
clinical implementation and data
collection there is a lack of consensus
for optimal ketogenic diet therapy in
cancer leading to a heterogenity of
methodological approaches and lapses in
effective monitoring poor
standardization has led to difficulties
with interstudy comparability as not all
protocols described as ketogenic will
offer therapeutic benefits in cancer
specific settings a general isocaloric
eucaloric ad libidum ketogenic diet is
not synonymous with dietary ketogenic
metabolic
therapy the application of ketogenic
diets in cancer should be nuanced and
must fulfill a set of measurable
biological criteria with each patient
exhibiting an individualized response
over time it is therefore essential to
record data systematically ideally in
real time correlating cumulative
physiological changes with anti-tumor
effects as such the glucose Ketone index
gki was developed as a unifying
biomarker for assessing biological
compliance and outcomes in brain
cancer Ketone body metabolism in cancer
why therapeutic ketosis Russell Wilder
at the Mayo Clinic formally developed
the ketogenic diet as a treatment for
Pediatric epilepsy in the 1920s although
various forms of very low carbohydrate
diets and fasting have been used
empirically for seizure control diabetes
obesity and other diseases since
Antiquity the prescription of ketogenic
diets for epilepsy declined with the
Advent of new anti-convulsants but
continues to be a Cornerstone in the
treatment of drug resistant epilepsy as
well as inborn errors of carbohy hydrate
metabolism recently ketogenic diets
experienced a major Resurgence in
clinical applications particularly for
insulin resistance obesity and
neuroprogressive disorders while
ketogenic compensated glucose modulation
as a cancer therapy has been described
more than 80 years ago in a case series
by brunings achieving stable therapeutic
ketosis requires adjustments to the
macronutrient composition of the diet
the C is defined as a dietary pattern
that is very low in carbohydrates
typically less than 20 G per day which
depletes liver glycogen and initiates
ketogenesis adequate in high quality
protein sufficient for muscle
maintenance without excessive
contribution to endogenous glucose
production and variable in fat depending
on whether it is intended to be
hypocaloric loss of adapost tissue
eucaloric weight maintenance or
hypercaloric recovery of adapost
tissue restricted consumption of
carbohydrates solicits a physiological
metabolic adaptation favoring fat
derived fuels over glucose resulting in
the endogenous production of water
soluble metabolites collectively known
as Ketone bodies
acetoacetate beta hydroxybutyrate and
acetone acetoacetate and beta
hydroxybutyrate are synthesized
predominantly in the liver and exported
into the bloodstream serving as a
glucose substitute for energy and
biosynthesis in mitochondrially healthy
cells after ketogenic adaptation Ketone
bodies can supply more than 50% of the
energy requirements of the human body
and over 70% of the brain's energy needs
from an endocrine perspective dietary
carbohydrate restriction reduces plasma
glucose excursions Bolis insulin spikes
and basil insulin levels thus removing
ins insin suppression of key enzymes
controlling
ketogenesis moreover glucagon secretion
decreases over time further reducing
basil hepatic glucose output
glycogenolysis and glucogenesis glucose
availability and basil
insulin standardizing ketogenic diets
for biological efficacy different
versions of the ketogenic diet have been
described in both scientific and lay
texts often including conflicting advice
especially for cancer
management this has led to widespread
confusion in the public sphere and
obstacles for clinical
implementation it is important to
remember that efforts to improve diet
adherence which are vital for patient
acral are still Bound by the gki or
other objective metrics of metabolic and
tumor responses the gki is the ratio of
glucose to Beta hydroxy berate the two
metabolites of interest in dietary
ketogenic metabolic therapy glucose and
ketones are assessed by capillary blood
sampling using specialized handheld
glucometers or extrapolated from
interstitial fluid measurements using
real-time wearable monitors steadystate
gki levels are used to estimate the
degree of therapeutic ketosis and other
biological processes such as insulin
signaling growth promoting Pathways and
systemic inflammation which are not
readily accessible for repeated or
real-time sampling and are generally
correlated with persistent decreases in
glycemia and increases in ketonemia
resulting in a decreased
gki the Baseline dietary strategy is to
follow a macronutrient distribution that
facilitates ketogenic adaptation
preserves lean body mass lbm and
maintains an adequate micronutrient
balance while keeping sustained daily
gki values below two ideally near one or
below figure two
continuous uninterrupted maintenance of
therapeutic gki ranges may be preferable
to occasional short-term or cyclical
strategies it is important to note that
dietary ketogenic metabolic therapy is
defined by a gradual sustained whole
body metabolic and endocrine adaptation
in fuel
partitioning absolute blood glucose
levels should be consistently below 90
mg per dcil or 5 molar this is an
arbitrary statistically derived cut off
that has been associated with improved
survival but does not define a known
biological
constraint preclinical and clinical
evidence suggests that patients should
aim for the lowest physiologically safe
and sustainable glucose and insulin
levels where the proxy indicating
effective insulin suppression is via
elevated blood Ketone levels throughout
the day especially during the evening
prandial time a morning fasted reading
can be misleading as healthy populations
and even type 2 diabetics can present
with low levels of nutritional ketosis
after the overnight
fast classic ketogenic diet ketogenic
ratios macronutrients diet adherence the
classic ketogenic diet developed by
Wilder is still prescribed in the
epilepsy field in adults the patient
energy needs are initially calculated
using standard formulas in a 3:1 or even
a 4:1 ratio
of fat grams to combined carbohydrate
plus protein grams the main benefit of
this approach is that both carbohydrate
and protein are kept very low together
less than 10% of total calories making
it easier to reach higher levels of
ketosis the classic ketogenic diet may
be too rigid for broad clinical
application and adherence across
heterogeneous cancer populations but it
serves as a well- documented reference
template from which to extrapolate
introductory practical guidance recently
macronutrient distributions have been
adapted for classic ketogenic diets as
they are more intuitive than diet ratios
the macronutrient distribution percent
energy of the classic ketogenic diet is
commonly defined as 88 to 90% fat 6 to
8% protein and 4%
carbohydrate it should be noted that the
daily energy intake will determine the
absolute quantity of macronutrient in
grams making flexible distributions less
suitable for higher caloric
expenditures for example a ketogenic
diet consisting of 10% carbohydrate for
a total caloric intake of 2,500 calories
per day equals to approximately 60 G per
day which may be incompatible with
therapeutic ketosis for most patients at
the physiological level reaching
sufficient liver ketogenesis typically
involves a carbohydrate intake below 20
to 50 g per day depending on the
metabolic Fitness of the
individual consequently the maximum
threshold of carbohydrate intake that
still allows for the desired degree of
ketosis and glycemic control will need
to be individually titrated followed by
protein for muscle maintenance and fat
for the desired caloric density an
automated calculator based on the
Mifflin St gor equation is provided in
additional File 2 gki tracking
spreadsheet
diet adherence to Classic High ratio
ketogenic diets can be perceived as
challenging in Free Living
adults however highly motivated patients
with an adequate understanding of the
scientific rationale have been able to
maintain strict compliance over
prolonged periods patients with cancer
may require more protein to preserve
lean body mass especially if the diet is
calorically restricted in this regard
ketogenic diets with adequate protein
and micronutrient content such as
Paleolithic ketogenic diets which induce
a lower than Baseline stable gki could
improve feasibility and long-term
compliance calorically restricted
ketogenic diet kdr reaching gki targets
while preserving muscle mass the classic
ketogenic diet was originally intended
to be eucaloric or unrestricted ad
libitum to allow for the appropriate
maturation of pediatric patients with
epilepsy and while therapeutic benefits
have been reported in preclinical cancer
models in both unrestricted and
calorically restricted amounts most
clinical studies focused on eucaloric
feeding to promote weight maintenance a
failure to reduced proliferation could
be a consequence of persistently
elevated glucose availability endocrine
or growth promoting signaling due to
energy Surplus despite shifting to a
ketogenic state in contrast ketogenic
diets consumed in calorically restricted
amounts resulting in a gradual
deliberate reduction of fat Mass with
preserved muscle mass could produce
better cumulative steady state gki
values in tandem with the underlying
metabolic and signaling effects such as
insulin suppression calorie restriction
independent of macronutrient composition
increases metabolic pressure on tumor
cells by modulating nutrient sensing
pathway ways the calorie restricted
ketogenic diet protocol should be
personalized in duration periodicity and
degree while being monitored to ensure
mild calorie restriction does not
increase the risk of
malnutrition after setting a
carbohydrate limit to induce ketogenesis
and calculating protein requirements to
preserve muscle mass the energy density
of the diet will be adjusted by total
fat
intake it may be necessary to exclude
calorie restriction in well nourished or
underweight patients as a rule BMI less
than 18 in practice patients with lower
body fat percentages can follow the
calorie restricted ketogenic diet in a
cyclical fashion introducing a return to
previous isocaloric conditions or a
slight caloric Surplus when weight
recovery is
required these intervals should still be
gki adjusted that is adhering to
ketogenic ratios and aiming for the
lowest possible gki
in all cases excessive lean body mass
loss should be avoided a classic calorie
restricted ketogenic diet with a high
ketogenic ratio is typically too low in
protein for long-term muscle maintenance
in adults emerging evidence suggests
that a well formulated protein
sufficient ketogenic diet May exert
Global anti-c Effects by decreasing
pro-inflammatory cyto kindes and
metabolites inducing a protein sparing
metabolic shift with further
anti-catabolic effects mediated by
Ketone bodies therefore protein intake
should be modified for sufficiency
monitoring the impact on gki glucose
variability and
ketogenesis adequate protein intake has
either neutral or minor effects on
ketogenesis and Insulin signaling as
well as hepatic renal glucan Genesis
total protein intake can be started at
the minimum recommended daily intake of
0.8 G per kilogram of body weight for a
sedentary individual in isocaloric
conditions and then increased
progressively based on factors related
to protein needs such as age physical
activity or health status it is
important to emphasize that dietary
amino acids cannot be restricted for
clinically relevant glutamine depletion
as glutamine levels remain relatively
stable through denovos synthesis
regardless of diet
composition physical activity coupled
with the low carbohydrate diet as well
as prolonged fasting or potential
non-pharmacological strategies to
achieve transient or chronic reduction
in plasma glutamine
respectively supplementation of medium
chain triglycerides MCTS and exogenous
Ketone bodies MCTS particularly C8
caprylic acid are a type of dietary fat
that can be supplemented to potentiate
liver
ketogenesis MCTS bypass normal fat
digestion and diffuse across the
intestinal membrane into the hepatic
capillary bed where they are readily
converted into ketones mild
gastrointestinal side effects may arise
during the initial weeks of
supplementation with tolerance improving
through gradual dose
escalation ketogenic diets with
supplemental MCTS typically pre-specify
a set daily intake EG 2 to 8 tablespoons
or 10 to 30% of total daily calories in
the form of MCTS which is intended to
improve ketonemia but also to lower
other sources of fat simplifying trial
design and improving adherence a
possible drawback of a diet enriched and
purified MCTS as opposed to naturally
occurring high fat foods is that they
are comparatively devoid of
micronutrients particularly liposoluble
vitamins for this reason overall food
choices should emphasize micronutrient
density especially if if the Baseline
ketogenic diet is composed exclusively
of medical foods that may be missing
essential nutrients or if significant
amounts of dietary supplements such as
MCTS are needed to achieve specific
biological outcomes egg K stability or
CIA prevention analogously exogenous
Ketone bodies EG Ketone Esters or Ketone
salts are a novel dietary formulation
that can be taken orally to temporarily
enhance circulating beta hydroxy Cate
levels beyond their bioenergetic role
katone bodies act as plyopic signaling
molecules with potential anti-neoplastic
benefits on their
own it is unclear however whether
short-term decreases in the gkii value
via supplemental MCTS or exogenous
ketones without a global metabolic
transition to therapeutic ketosis by
chronic ketogenic diets and or fasting
would retain protective effects against
fermentation fuel inhibition in normal
cells elevated blood glucose and Ketone
levels are typically not found during
the natural physiology of calorie
restriction or fasting in the context of
dietary ketogenic metabolic therapy
exogenous ketones can also have a
measurable impact on glycemic
regulation therefore supplementation of
Ketone bodies could be considered to
further enhance the therapeutic efficacy
of a ketogenic diet or a calorie
restricted ketogenic diet particularly
under circumstances of reduced
compliance or to reach the higher levels
hypothesized to mitigate cancer
CIA in conclusion supplementation of
MCTS and exogenous ketones can be viewed
as a valuable tool to empower patients
to modulate their ketonemia ketogenesis
and glucogenesis without being an
absolute requirement boosting Ketone
levels while following a gki adjusted
ketogenic diet may be a espcially useful
during the initial adaptation to fasting
lower limits of U glycemia radiotherapy
Hyperbaric medicine and conventional and
adant drug
therapies flexible protocols and
quantifiable criteria of compliance
beyond the classic ketogenic diet
several dietary regimens to achieve
various degrees of ketosis have been
described in clinical studies including
the modified Atkins diet 60 to 65% fat
25 to 35% protein 5 to 10% carbohydrate
high protein ketogenic diets 60% fat 35%
protein 5% carbohydrates Paleolithic
ketogenic diets based on animal fat meat
and aful with a 2:1 fat to protein
ratio then Mediterranean ketogenic diets
less than 15% carbohydrates based on
Green green vegetables olive oil fish
and meat General non otherwise specified
ketogenic diets 70 to 80% fat 10 to 20%
protein less than 10% carbohydrate
plant-based low carbohydrate diets
generally not sufficiently ketogenic as
well as other targeted and cyclical
variations with or without calorie
restriction intermittent or prolonged
water only fasting can be included
regardless of diet composition the
primary differences are in the maximum
limit of carbohydrate and protein the
timing of feeding and intermittent
calorie restriction as well as the
underlying food selection to accommodate
personal dietary
preferences nevertheless diet
flexibility should be contingent upon
the patient's individual physiological
response biological measurable and
quantifiable effects not subjective
biases or beliefs will ultimately
determine the suitability of the chosen
Foods if glycemia ketonemia and by
extension the sustained gki values are
not in the pre-specified Target Zone the
selected diet may not be appropriate for
the patient any ketogenic diet protocol
whatever the Practical food selection
may be should fulfill the following
criteria one allow for a sustained gki
of 2.0 or below ideally 1 o or below
this involves the lowest physiologically
achievable absolute glucose levels
ideally less than 5 molar or 90 mg per
dcil minimal glycemic variability
difference between the highest and
lowest glucose level as well as reduced
insulin signaling and the related growth
promoting and energy sensing Pathways
egpi 3K
M glucose and beta hydroxy butyrate are
expected to fluctuate weight depending
on carbohydrate and calorie restriction
as well as fasting duration protein
intake drug therapies hormonal balance
emotional stress circadian rhythms and
nutritional status vitamin and mineral
sufficiency reaching the proposed gki
Target implicitly translates into
lowering carbohydrates to less than 20
to 50 g per day regardless of ketogenic
ratios or macronutrient percentages
andless concurring with a high level of
physical activity Technologies such as
continuous glucose monitoring CGM and
continuous Ketone monitoring ckm should
be leveraged during the learning phase
as the patient explores the impact of
different foods on gki
variability it should be noted that ckm
sensors are currently available as
non-medical devices while clinical
testing of dual glucose Ketone
monitoring systems is underway two
patients are often faced with
uncertainty regarding optimal gki
targets that would be safe and
physiologically attainable depending on
their evolving disease status and
concomitant therapies two empirical gki
baselines can be determined to serve as
idiosyncratic biological reference
points once completing the initial
ketogenic adaptation via dietary
modification a fasting gki Baseline can
be measured after at least 72 hours of
water fasting
EG days 4 to S of a 5 to 7day water fast
which produces gki values unaffected by
dietary inputs a zero carbohydrate
Paleolithic ketogenic diet with
intermittent fasting one meal per day
can provide a second Baseline that is
representative of the lowest gki
variability during minimal dietary
inputs fat and protein only in a
compressed feeding window all subsequent
diet adjustments can be compared to
these two benchmarks during study
planning and subsequent data analysis
diet flexibility should not compromise
gki targets biological compliance
outweighs self-reported or perceived
dietary
compliance three adequate protein intake
to maintain lean body mass without
disrupting gki starting at 0.8 G per
kilogram of body weight and typically
settling between 1.2 and 1.5 G per kilog
for most
individuals higher initial targets are
justified in certain patient
demographics EG older age pre-existing
comorbidities or anticipated negative
impacts of the cancer diagnosis EG loss
of appetite during active cancer
treatment or limited physical activity
due to cancer fatigue protein quality
should be a focus to ensure adequate
amino acid ratios without forcing
protein over
consumption four changes in lean body
mass should be monitored on a regular
basis patients at borderline low weight
or with insufficient lean body mass May
alternate between calorie restricted
ketogenic diet and gki adjusted
eucaloric or Surplus intervals to
preserve and rebuild muscle tissue
although the systemic metabolic
alterations induced by tumor derived
factors secreted directly by GBM cells
are still under study functional
impairment leading to undernutrition and
side effects of treat May contribute to
Progressive loss of skeletal muscle off
label and research phase anti-catabolic
agents anti-inflammatory drugs and
appetite Regulators can synergize with
exercise and Nutrition Therapy to
prevent muscle
wasting five adequate micronutrient and
vitamin intake it is preferable to
obtain all dietary elements from
nutrient dense foods EG eggs beef oily
fish aful if the included Foods cannot
maintain adequate levels of certain
essential nutrients or minerals specific
multivitamin and mineral supplementation
is warranted monitor for secondary hypoc
carnate anemia and supplement if needed
macronutrient and micronutrient tracking
can be simplified using diet tracking
software lessons learned from Clinical
Research evaluating ketogenic diets for
GBM large-scale clinical integration of
precision nutrition for cancer
management still poses a challenge with
no consensus on best
practices consequently patients tend to
freely choose their dietary
plan additional file three table S1
provides relevant examples of
realistically achievable glucose and
Ketone values that have been reported in
studies examining ketogenic diets in
high-grade brain
tumors concerns have been raised about
the feasibility of reaching and
sustaining the hypothetical therapeutic
window of ketogenic metabolic therapy
suggesting that dietary induced
hypoglycemia as a treatment for brain
tumors may be
simplistic while a high degree of
personal motivation specific domain
knowledge and typically the assistance
of a ketogenic diet trained professional
is indeed critical for strict diet
adherence more research is needed to
establish causal links between
quantifiable metabolic changes and
therapeutic outcomes as well as
synergistic pharmacological interv
ventions to enhance
efficacy common pitfalls in clinical
research
methodology motivated well-informed
patients should understand that
objective biomarkers of compliance such
as cumulative time in specific gki
ranges May influence therapeutic
outcomes therefore patients should be
instructed to pursue the lowest possible
gki ultimately a gki adjusted ketogenic
diet or a calorie restricted ketogenic
diet should be considered a long-term
strategy rather than a limited
intervention patient education and data
collection tools to monitor blood
glucose and ketones patients should be
counseled on how to use fingerprick
glucose and Ketone meters initially
measuring at least twice a day to
capture data
variability researchers can expand this
testing schedule for example 1 to 2
hours postmeal when new foods or changes
in portion size are introduced realtime
continuous glucose monitoring is
preferred maybe even adding continuous
Ketone monitoring as these methods
deliver more robust data collection and
bio
feedback pre-approved food lists meal
templates sample meal plans and recipes
to streamline macronutrient tracking
patients and caregivers will be expected
to keep food records adhere to templates
or use diet tracking software especially
during the diet transition phase a
photographic diary may help with logging
and data sharing with the added benefit
of timestamping the feeding schedule in
the future image-based food recognition
algorithms could reduce logging efforts
compliance may be compromised if
disagreements exist between family
members or external Health Care
Providers regarding the suitability of
the treatment plan reaching consensus is
encouraged with examination of the
scientific literature to solve any
questions regarding the rationale and
expected outcomes of all proposed
therapies including standard of care
General and disease specific educational
resources to implement long-term
ketogenic diet plans are available for
both patients and
clinicians key steps in the treatment
timeline a chronological timeline is
crucial for recordkeeping and
establishing associations between
procedures and therapeutic outcomes or
side effects figure three provides an
over of ketogenic metabolic therapy for
high-grade Goma and table 3 summarizes
key steps in the suggested clinical
implementation of dietary and
pharmacological ketogenic metabolic
therapy the steps in this timeline are
based on the Press pulse therapeutic
strategy gki adjusted ketogenic diet
calorie restricted ketogenic diet and
fasting are implemented as a metabolic
press to restrict fermentable fuels
reduce inflammation and normalize the
tumor micro environment while drugs that
simultaneously Target glycolysis
glutaminolysis and other cancer
Associated pathways are defined as
either press or pulse interventions
depending on pharmacodynamics and
safety representative diet drug
combinations have been presented in case
reports and pilot clinical trials
although most studies thus far emphasize
feasibility and additivity with standard
of care rather than integrating dietary
and pharmacolog iCal ketogenic metabolic
therapy as a prerequisite continuous
biomarker-driven metabolic priming
Baseline even though adjustments to
nutrition and over-the-counter
supplementation are within the patient
purview the use of prescription
medication involves the cooperation of a
physician trained in metabolic
oncology lack of familiarity inertia of
prescribing habits and fear of legal
vulnerability can be reasons for not
pursuing off label use within standard
practice
outside research dietary ketogenic
metabolic therapy ketogenic diet calorie
restricted ketogenic diet and fasting
can be implemented freely by the patient
but active drug repurposing or
compassionate use as Allowed by local
regulations requires a clear rationale
and informed
consent tumor diagnosis and shared
decisionmaking it is preferable if
possible to make the initial tentative
diagnosis using non-invasive
neuroimaging techniques CT MRI or pet to
avoid the risk of exacerbating tumor
growth or iatrogenic cell dissemination
through inflammatory
enaxis blood panel
analysis biomarkers of General Health
including hemogram electrolytes hepatic
and renal function inflammation and
vitamin status should be within or near
the normal range before initiating
therapeutic measures that carry a risk
of adverse effects key dietary nutrients
to monitor on a carbohydrate restricted
diet include carnine thiamine folate
pantothenic acid calcium phosphorus iron
vitamin D and trace
minerals ketogenic diets partial fasting
fasting mimicking and or water only
fasting can improve pre-existing
lifestyle related blood panel
abnormalities particularly hyper
insulinemia insulin resistance and
chronic
inflammation metabolic
stratification during routine clinical
practice metabolic targeting can be
informed by previous molecular and
mechanistic characterizations of the
tumor subtype High uptake of glucose and
glutamine is considered a common feature
of high-grade gomas correlating with
cell density and aggressiveness
especially in grade three and four
tumors a fasting period longer than 12
hours is advisable prior to the scan to
facilitate 18 fdg transport into the
tumor and lower insulin mediated glucose
uptake in the surrounding tissue a
combination of anatomic and or metabolic
Imaging at Baseline and then
sequentially every 3 to 6 weeks to
corroborate pre-specified outcomes EG
stable disease is
advised surgical debulking surgical
debulking should be performed promptly
after diagnosis while still prioritizing
careful surgical planning to ensure
maximal resection in asymptomatic or
slow growing tumors active surveillance
provides an opportunity to implement
dietary ketogenic metabolic therapy as a
neuroprotective intervention prior to
surgery which could reduce angiogenesis
inflammation and
edema initiate dietary ketogenic
metabolic therapy this next section is
the start of part two
part two contains starting the ketogenic
metabolic therapy medications for blood
glucose control implementation of Da to
inhibit glutamine other compounds and
supplements figures and
tables this video was produced for
www.school.com keto cancer